---
slug: apple_environ_friendly
title: Apple’s "Environmentally-Friendly" Approach to Mobile Devices
date: April 18, 2021
author: Pranav Ramesh
author_title: Technepreneur & blogger
author_url: https://github.com/pr28416
author_image_url: https://media-exp1.licdn.com/dms/image/C4D03AQE8US7zv3uUhQ/profile-displayphoto-shrink_400_400/0/1619024957277?e=1626912000&v=beta&t=cDgil4bLuNR5N8cVLnZHlmfiHcZ_ad0HKC2KsPbONfM
tags: [apple, mobile devices]
---

The past few years have marked Apple’s claimed “transition” to an environmentally-friendly approach towards their technological products and lifestyles. They have stressed sustainability through their reuse of recycled materials to create new products, powerful processors and batteries built into their mobile devices, and complete infrastructure remodeling to use 100% reusable energy in their headquarters in Cupertino. However, one could argue whether Apple’s steps towards reducing their environmental footprint are in fact very minimal, simply because they are eliminating certain practices rather than changing them altogether.

For instance, let’s take a look at 2020, where, in Apple’s annual product release presentation, they specifically stressed how they value the environment and seek to reduce their global footprint. They asserted that many of the newly-released iPhone 12’s environmental features were built upon past endeavors, seeking to reduce the emission of harmful chemicals in the manufacturing of their products. Indeed, they revealed that the new models are using 100% recycled, rare earth elements, and that every Apple device sold will be 100% carbon neutral, from material collection, component manufacturing, assembly, and so forth. However, they then went a step further to state that, because millions of users already have proprietary earphones and charging bricks, Apple would remove these items from the iPhone box.

Proponents of such change argue that this indeed is the correct solution to reducing Apple’s carbon footprint, and that because so many iPhone users already have earphones and charging bricks, Apple does not need to waste resources to create more unnecessary accessories. In contrast, opponents assert that such a move goes too far because many users often have damaged bricks and/or headphones and are buying a new iPhone with the expectation that they would receive complimentary accessories. In addition, such a move actually increases the profit margins for Apple. The majority of iPhones prior to the iPhone 12 included a Lightning to USB-A charging cable, as well as a USB-A power adapter. However, the fact that the iPhone 12 includes a different Lightning to USB-C charging cable and not its respective USB-C power adapter means that most iPhone users will have to spend an extra $20 simply to purchase the proprietary adapter necessary for charging their phones. Additionally, if consumers wanted earphones, they would need to also purchase Apple’s proprietary Lightning EarPods for an additional $20. These two accessories, coupled with the $829 base price for the unlocked iPhone 12 model and any required sales tax, would increase the price to almost $900, a price which, compared to that of the previous year’s iPhone 11, is more expensive for a worse deal. Many believe that Apple uses the “environmental” label as a cover for what they truly desire to be increased profits.

Such opponents state that, instead of removing important accessories from the shipping boxes, Apple should instead make their phones more durable and repairable. With the newly released iPhone 12, Apple has made it extremely difficult, if not impossible, for third-parties such as iFixit to repair their phones in the likely event that they get damaged. Moreover, Apple tends to charge an exorbitant amount for reparations outside of warranty periods unless users purchase an additional AppleCare plan. By instead choosing to improve the durability of the phones and make them easily repairable by third-parties, Apple has a better chance of reducing their environmental footprint without reducing their profit margins greatly.
